added more information on gc and rooting (#212)
servo/book: src/design-documentation/script/index.md

# Script

Servo is unique in that it uses garbage collection for some things that are non obvious. For example, every dom object
(a struct with `#[dom_object])` on it is controlled by spidermonkeys garbage collector. Extra care is to be taken when interacting with this. While the garbage collector is complicated and has multiple modes we will assume for now the following.
Whenever the GC runs, the rust program is stopped at whatever state it was in.

## Rooting and you

The most often used method is Rooting. Rooting (`Root<Dom<T>>`) means that we tell the garbage collector two things.
- Please do not delete any value that is reachable by this root.
- Please fix any pointer that points to this after you do a garbage collection.

In the following we will look at some code that is close to what is happening behind some abstractions but not the complete picture.
Let us now assume we have the following code:
```rust
#[dom_object]
struct Kittens {
    children: Vec<Cat>
}

fn some_function(cats: &Kittens) {
    let children = & cats.children;

>     play_with(children)

Reviewer: useful to show fn play_with(cat: &Cat), and call play_with(*&cat) in a loop, to show that DomRoot derefs.

Author: This does not have DomRoot yet, so I am not sure what you mean.

Whenever the GC runs, the rust program is stopped at whatever state it was in.
We will for now only assume read only access to objects as this makes it easer to understand.

## Rooting and you

The most often used method is Rooting. Rooting (`Root<Dom<T>>`) means that we tell the garbage collector two things.
- Please do not delete any value that is reachable by this root.
- Please fix any pointer that points to this after you do a garbage collection.

In the following we will look at some code that is close to what is happening behind some abstractions but not the complete picture.
Let us now assume we have the following code:
```rust
#[dom_struct]
struct Kittens {
    children: Vec<Dom<Cat>>
}

fn some_function(cats: &Kittens) {
    let children = & cats.children;
    play_with(children)
}
```

Without rooting the GC could pause our program after we got the reference to children, move the `Kittens` struct around
and we would have invalid access when playing with them! This holds even if Kittens was rooted by some other mechanism earlier in the call chain.

> Hence, we need to transform the code into

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If our data is not rooted correctly, the GC could pause our program after we got the reference to children, move the `kittens` value in memory, and we would have invalid access when playing with them!
This is true even if `kittens` was rooted by the code that called `play_with_kittens`.
Hence, we need to transform the code into
```

    play_with_cats(children);
    cleanup_after_cats(children, can_gc);
}
```

The pecise notion of this is that we can be sure that no GC will happen when we call 'play_with_cats' but there
might be a GC happening while we call 'cleanup_after_cats'. The reason why some methods can incur GC and some methods do not are deep in the SpiderMonkey connections to servo and you will generally not be obvious.
In essence, you can not use can_gc until you call a method that needs it and then you go back along your callstack and give it as argument to every call until you arrive in something origininating from 'Bindings.conf' (see how to implement a dom meth'od).

You will sometimes see '&JSContext' and &mut JSContext' and 'NoGC'. You can think of '&mut JSContext' as a 'CanGc' and 'JSContext' and 'NoGC' as the absence of 'CanGc'.

JSContext and associates are the new way as they have some advantages.

# The performance of rooting

```rust
#[dom_struct]
struct Kittens {
    children: Vec<Cat>
}

fn some_function(cats: &Kittens) {
    let happy = cats.children.iter().map(|cat| Root::from_ref(cat)).any(|cat| cat.is_purring());
    if happy {
        println!("Happy cat found!");
    }

> }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
struct Kittens {
    children: Vec<Cat>
}

impl Kittens {
    fn children(&self) -> Vec<DomRoot<Cat>> {
        self.children.iter().map(|cat| cat.as_rooted()).collect()
    }
}

fn some_function(cats: &Kittens) {
    let happy = cats.children().iter().any(|cat| cat.is_purring());
    if happy {
        println!("Happy cat found!");
    }
```

# Script
This document should get you up to speed on Script Thread, rooting and Gc. It is by no means complete.

Servo is unique in that it uses garbage collection for some things that are non-obvious.
For example, every DOM object (a struct with `#[dom_struct]`) is owned by SpiderMonkey's garbage collector.
This necessitates that the engine APIs that interact with these objects must be sound when garbage collection can occur at many points in the program.
While [the garbage collector](https://firefox-source-docs.mozilla.org/js/gc.html) (GC) is complex and has multiple modes, we can assume that whenever the GC runs then the Rust program does not run.

## Rooting and rooted types

An important part of garbage collection is establishing the roots of the object graph.
A root tells the garbage collector two things:
1. Do not delete any value that is transitively reachable from this root.
2. If garbage collection causes this rooted value to be moved in memory, all pointers to this value should be updated.

In Servo's code, roots are created automatically by using the `DomRoot<T>`, `Root<T>`, and `Rooted<T>` types.

> See the [module documentation](https://doc.servo.org/script/dom/bindings/root/index.html) for more details about the difference. These types implement `Deref`, so we an treat them as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See the [module documentation](https://doc.servo.org/script/dom/bindings/root/index.html) for more details about the difference. These types implement `Deref`, so we can treat them as
```

normal references.

The following examples contain simplifications of real Servo code patterns to make them easier to understand.
Assume the following code, declaring a `Kittens` type that contains pointers to `Cat` types, all of which are owned by the garbage collector:
```rust
#[dom_struct]
struct Kittens {
    children: Vec<Dom<Cat>>
}

fn play_with_kittens(kittens: &Kittens) {
    let children = & cats.children;
    play_with(children)
}
```

Without rooting the GC could pause our program after we got the reference to children, move the `Kittens` struct around

> and we would have invalid access when playing with them! This holds even if Kittens was rooted by some other mechanism earlier in the call chain. Remember that the Garbage Collector cannot change pointers of our local variable 'children' if it doesn't know aobut it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and we would have invalid access when playing with them!
This holds even if Kittens was rooted by some other mechanism earlier in the call chain.
Remember that the Garbage Collector cannot change pointers of our local variable 'children' if it doesn't know about it.
```

Hence, we need to transform the code into
```rust
#[dom_struct]
struct Kittens {
    children: Vec<Dom<Cat>>
}

fn play_with_kittens(cats: &Kittens) {
    let children: Vec<DomRoot<Cat>> = cats.children.iter().map(|cat| cat.as_rooted()).collect();
    play_with(children)
}
```

> (We have to obviously make sure that getting the cat reference and rooting it is one atomic action but let us ignore this for now).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will assume that getting the cat reference and rooting it is one atomic action.
```

Unrooting (the reverse) will automatically be done via a Drop impl on `DomRoot<T>`.

To ensure web API implementations in Servo are sound, the engine code is conservative and usually returns rooted types (such as `DomRoot<Node>`).

> This is an acceptable tradeoff between safety and performance because rooting and unrooting operations are efficient. (How efficient? They are essentially just adding and removing from a vector).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is an acceptable tradeoff between safety and performance because rooting and unrooting operations are efficient; they essentially just push and pop vector elements.
```

## Crown and CanGc

> Now rooting could be easily forgotten when implementing particular exciting apis. How to we prevent this?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's easy to overlook rooting concerns when implementing new APIs.
```

> Crown is the answer (if you are working on Script things you should run `./mach build --use-crown` to be sure it is checking things).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A static analysis tool named Crown prevents this in Servo's CI, and it can be run locally with `./mach build --use-crown` to check your changes.
```

> In essence, Crown just checks that you do not forgotten to root things and you will sometimes see certain lints in the code talking to crown such as `#[cfg_attr(crown, allow(crown::unrooted_must_root))]`. These essentially disable crown and should only be used in very specific circumstances.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Crown looks for values that require rooting that are not rooted appropriately.
These checks can be disabled for a particular function with the annotation `#[cfg_attr(crown, allow(crown::unrooted_must_root))]`.
Similar to `unsafe` in Rust, these are sometimes needed when the static analysis checks are too conservative but the code is expected to follow the rooting rules (e.g. a function returns a type that needs rooting and all callers immediately root it).
```

> But there is another piece of the puzzle tangentially related. While rooting gives us the way to enforce the GC to play nice with our rust pointers, we also have rust RefCells. While the pointers for these are now properly handled by the GC, the GC needs to borrow the `RefCell` to test reachability and redirect the pointer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While rooting ensures the GC can observe our Rust pointers, we also have Rust RefCells.
As part of tracing garbage collected objects for reachability, the GC needs to borrow every `RefCell` it encounters.
```

> But we can only borrow a `RefCell` not simulataneously. What happens if we have a Gc pause while having a cell borrowd?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is a problem if a `RefCell` is already mutably borrowed when a garbage collection operation occurs.
```

```rust
struct CatCarrier {
    cat: RefCell<Dom<Cat>>,
}

fn some_function(carrier: &CatCarrier) {

>     let mutable_cat = carrier.inner_cat.borrow_mut().as_rooted();
>     play_with_cat_mutably(mutable_cat);
>     cleanup_playspace();

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    let mut mutable_cat = carrier.inner_cat.borrow_mut();
    *mutable_cat = play_with_cat_mutably(mutable_cat.as_rooted());
    cleanup_playspace();
```

}
```

> Now assume that `cleanup_playspace` can call the GC. It could then happen that we

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now assume that `cleanup_playspace` can trigger a garbage collection operation.
It could then happen that we
```

- Hold the mutable borrow to the cat inside the carrier.
- Cleanup after the cat.
- The GC pauses and tries to trace the rooted `mutable_cat` via borrowing the RefCell.
- Panics because the RefCell can only be borrowed mutably once!

We call this a borrow hazard. To prevent this we have the following solution.

```rust
fn some_function(carrier: &CatCarrier, can_gc: CanGc) {
    {

>         let mutable_cat = carrier.inner_cat.borrow_mut().as_rooted();
>         play_with_cat_mutably(mutable_cat);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        let mutable_cat = carrier.inner_cat.borrow_mut();
        *mutable_cat = play_with_cat_mutably(mutable_cat.as_rooted());
```

    }
    cleanup_playspace(can_gc);
}
```

> Now this example is not complete and only here to illustrate the following point.
> CanGC (which is a trivial type and easily copyable) was introduced, not as a
> formal prevention of the borrow hazard but as a note to the programmer. It says:
> Be careful if you want to have a mutable borrow that it does not cross the boundaries
> of a function taking `CanGc`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example illustrates a `CanGc` type which is passed as an argument to functions that can trigger a GC operation.
It does not prevent borrow hazards, but makes them easier to notice when reading and reviewing Servo's code.
```

There are more details [here](borrow_hazard.md) on how to recognize and handle borrow hazards.

> We only want to use this as a motivating example for the following section on `&JSContext`
> and `&mut JSContext`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> Our running example would then look something like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Suppose our example of playing with cats looks like the following:
```

```rust
fn some_function(cats: &Kittens, can_gc: CanGc) {
    let children: Vec<DomRoot<Cat>> = cats.children.iter().map(|cat| cat.as_rooted()).collect();
    play_with_cats(children);
    cleanup_after_cats(children, can_gc);
}
```

> The pecise notion of this is that we can be sure that no GC will happen when we call `play_with_cats` but there
> might be a GC happening while we call `cleanup_after_cats`. The reason why some methods can incur GC and some methods do not are deep in the SpiderMonkey connections to servo and you will generally not be obvious.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```suggestion
We assume that no GC can occur when we call `play_with_cats`, but `cleanup_after_cats` may trigger a GC operation.
The SpiderMonkey API is broad and complicated, and the rules about which API functions can trigger a GC operation are often not obvious.
```

> What does it mean for you?
> In essence, if a method you are calling needs `CanGc` you should have your method use `CanGc`
> so that everybody can remember to be careful about borrow hazards around the code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a method you are calling needs `CanGc`, you should accept a `CanGc` argument to ensure the callers consider the risk of borrow hazards when calling your method.
```

# JSContext, &mut JSContext

> But as you can see this can be hazardous. What if somebody forgot to use the `CanGc` attribute
> in their function call but actually does call the GC somewhere deep in the call stack?
> Then we created a borrow hazard that will lead to crashes we might not understand.
> To solve this we introduce `JSContext` and `&mut JSContext`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`CanGc` is better than nothing, but it's still possible to write code that calls SpiderMonkey APIs that can trigger GC operations and forget to add a `CanGc` argument.
We now have better ways to track when garbage collection can occur: the `&JSContext` and `&mut JSContext` types.
```

Here we require that any SpiderMonkey method that can run the Gc will need a `&mut JSContext` reference. Because these cannot be created outside of the Dom bindings we will have to
carry these through all our function calls.

Similarly, we have the related types of `&JSContext` which means that we call some SpiderMonkey API that does not call the GC.

> We also have the `NoGC` type which can be constructed via a `JSContext`. You can think of this as enforcing that no GC methods can be called when a `NoGC` is held. Think ofthe `NoGC` being essentially a `struct NoGC(&mut JSContext)`, hence, it forbids any method needing a `&mut JSContext` being called while `NoGC` is alive (via the multiple mutable borrow rule).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unlike `CanGc`, these types use the Rust compiler's borrowing rules and SpiderMonkey API wrappers to ensure that any API that can trigger garbage collection requires a `&mut JSContext` argument.
Since these values are unique, they must be passed by callers.
Similarly, any API function that _cannot_ GC but still requires access to a JS context only takes a `&JSContext` argument.

There is also a `NoGc` type that can be constructed from a `JSContext`.
Since this type borrows the `&mut JSContext`, it makes it impossible to invoke any code that requires a `&mut JSContext` argument (i.e. can trigger a GC operation) while the `NoGc` value exists.
```

> Note:

> > Currently the servo codebase is transforming from the previous `CanGc` approach

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Currently the Servo codebase is transforming from the previous `CanGc` approach
```

> to the `JSContext` approach. You might see both in the codebase and also several

> > escape hatches.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> to the `JSContext` approach.
> You might see both in the codebase and also several escape hatches.
```

# The performance of rooting

```rust
#[dom_struct]
struct Kittens {
    children: Vec<Cat>
}

impl Kittens {
    fn children(&self) -> Vec<DomRoot<Cat>> {
        self.children.iter().map(|cat| cat.as_rooted()).collect()
    }
}

fn some_function(cats: &Kittens) {
    let happy = cats.children().iter().any(|cat| cat.is_purring());
    if happy {
        println!("Happy cat found!");
    }
}
```

> This API for interacting with kittens is safely rooted, but when there are many children the rooting and unrooting work can add up. Can we somehow go around this without violating safety?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This API for interacting with kittens is safely rooted, but when there are many children the rooting and unrooting work can add up.
We can use the `JSContext` types to ensure code that violates rooting rules won't trigger any GC operations that could observe those violations.
```

Yes. Remember rusts golden rule that `&mut` can only be hold exactly once!

> What if we have a new type

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since `&mut` is a unique borrow, we can introduce a new type:
```
